---
layout: page
category: lego
subcategory: wishlist
title: R2-D2
series: Star Wars
item: 75308
pieces: 2314
age: 18+
link: https://www.lego.com/en-ca/product/r2-d2-75308
date: 1999-01-01
price: 300
---

"Relive classic _Star Wars™_ moments as you build this exceptionally detailed R2-D2 LEGO® droid figure. The brilliant new-for-May-2021 design is packed with authentic details, including a retractable mid-leg, rotating head, opening and extendable front hatches, a periscope that can be pulled up and turned, and Luke Skywalker’s lightsaber hidden in a compartment in the head.

This cool construction model comes with a buildable display stand, featuring an information plaque, R2-D2 LEGO droid figure and an exclusive Lucasfilm 50th anniversary LEGO brick, to complete an awesome centerpiece for your home or workplace.

Part of a premium-quality collection of LEGO _Star Wars_ building kits for adults, this set would make a wonderful gift for yourself, _Star Wars_ fans and advanced LEGO builders.

* Build and display this fantastically detailed, new-for-May-2021, LEGO® brick model of an iconic character from the _Star Wars_™ saga: R2-D2 (75308).
* Authentic features include a retractable mid-leg, rotating head, opening and extendable front hatches and adjustable periscope, plus a lightsaber hidden in a compartment in the head.
* Includes a buildable display stand with an information plaque, LEGO® _Star Wars_™ R2-D2 LEGO droid figure and a special Lucasfilm 50th anniversary LEGO brick.
* This premium-quality set is part of a series of collectible LEGO® _Star Wars_™ build-to-display models.
* Offering a challenging and rewarding build, this 2,315-piece set makes an awesome birthday present, holiday gift or surprise treat for any _Star Wars_™ connoisseur and LEGO® _Star Wars_ lover.
* Measuring over 12.5 in. (31 cm) high, 7.5 in. (20 cm) wide and 6 in. (15 cm) deep, this collectible, brick-built R2-D2 model makes an impressive centerpiece in a home or workplace.
* Thinking of buying this set for a _Star Wars_™ memorabilia collector who is new to LEGO® building? Don’t worry. It comes with clear instructions so they can tackle this complex build with confidence.
* Collectible LEGO® _Star Wars_™ sets for adults are designed for discerning hobbyists who enjoy DIY projects to disconnect from their day-to-day lives in a mindful, creative and fun way.
* LEGO® components meet rigorous industry standards to ensure compatibility and a simple, secure connection every time.
* LEGO® bricks and pieces are tested in almost every way imaginable to make sure that they satisfy stringent global safety standards."

<br>

#### Associated Links

* [BrickLink](https://www.bricklink.com/v2/catalog/catalogitem.page?S=75308-1)
* [Wicked Brick](https://www.wickedbrick.com/en-ca/products/display-case-for-lego-star-wars-r2d2-75308)
