---
layout: social
category: social
network: Mastodon
title: Logic of Scission
link: https://assemblag.es/@steinea/108214123626998399
twitterID: 108214123626998399
date: 2022-04-29
---

My most recent piece of writing is "Logic of Scission," on Plato's repudiation of sensation and empirical knowledge in the Phaedo.

<https://steinea.github.io/notes/2022/04/27/logic-of-scission>

This continues a long series of essays that began with the Presocratics, tying them together with more recent figures like Gilbert Simondon, Emmanuel Levinas, Alain Badiou, and François Laruelle.

RSS is working on my site, so you should be able to drop the url into your feed reader and have new work delivered to you as soon as it's up.



Reply from @cj:

@steinea This was great, especially the emphasis of knowing as common to all, knowing as a kind of social act in a way. It reminded me of something from a book I read recently:

>Conscious from con-scio, I know with. Consciousness is that act of attention to something under the auspices of its sign, an act which is social in origin.What Descartes did not know: no such isolated individual as he described can be conscious.



Reply to @cj:

@cj Thanks for reading! And yes precisely, knowing is not just knowing-how and knowing-that, but knowing-with! I've always appreciated Donna Haraway's "sympoiesis," making-with, for this kind of becoming-with-others.

It really struck me reading the Presocratics, and then going to the Phaedo, how the thinkers before Plato emphasize intellectual collectivity (especially Heraclitus). That Cartesian mistake is the Platonic mistake, to think we can know rightly in solitude.
