---
layout: social
category: social
network: Mastodon
title: Compost Epistemology
link: https://assemblag.es/@steinea/108506585813404901
twitterID: 108506585813404901
date: 2022-06-19
---

"Compost Epistemology"—a new piece of writing, or rather, a bundle of clippings, put together in the time since reading "Garbage Heap" by @cj <https://steinea.github.io/notes/2022/06/19/compost-epistemology>

An #epistemology born of and for the earth, assembled out of quotations from Bakhtin, Benjamin, de Certeau, Rancière, Harney and Moten, Bourriaud, and Haraway, all of whom have shaped my approach to #study and #practice.



Reply from @cj:

@steinea This is a great assemblage of clippings Eric. How compelling to transform the "garbage heap" into "compost" — something that breaks down over time and whose decomposition contributes back into the whole.

Would be curious if you have any inclinations/patterns/ideas of how you put a compost epistemology into practice.


Reply to @cj:

@cj Bakhtin on monologization has been very important for me on this: don't purge the polyphony from your citational background. Similarly, Haraway's citational practice is an application of her critique of the pure origin; origin without innoncence. We're all made up of quotations of voices, as de Certeau puts it—scrappers and salvagers of words and ideas. Benjamin's Arcades Project is perhaps the best example of composition in this mode: "I needn't *say* anything," he writes.

@cj Or as Thomas Nail puts it in his Theory of the Earth, we are all participants in a "cosmic commons," earth, sun, and universe—so compost epistemology is a matter of putting knowledge back in common, a commoning of ideas.


Reply from @katebowles:

@steinea @cj I am so grateful for all of this thinking. Thank you for putting it out there.
